---
layout: leetcode
num: 1171
title: "1171. (Medium) Remove Zero Sum Consecutive Nodes from Linked List"
date: 2021-01-16
---

<https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-zero-sum-consecutive-nodes-from-linked-list/>

# Statement
---

Given the `head` of a linked list, we repeatedly delete consecutive sequences of nodes that sum to `0` until there are no such sequences.

After doing so, return the head of the final linked list. You may return any such answer.

(Note that in the examples below, all sequences are serializations of `ListNode` objects.)

### Example 1:
```
Input: head = [1,2,-3,3,1]
Output: [3,1]
Note: The answer [1,2,1] would also be accepted.
```

### Example 2:
```
Input: head = [1,2,3,-3,4]
Output: [1,2,4]
```

### Example 3:
```
Input: head = [1,2,3,-3,-2]
Output: [1]
```
 

### Constraints:
- The given linked list will contain between `1` and `1000` nodes.
- Each node in the linked list has `-1000 <= node.val <= 1000`.

---

# Approach

## First ideas
I don't get any immediate ideas about what to do here. It's not obvious that any data structures will directly help. So the first step will be to morph this problem into a similar but manageable problem.

## Do examples by hand
Let's start with the first example: `[1,2,-3,3,1]`.

If we iterate over the array, we notice that we can treat this like a [difference array](https://wcipeg.com/wiki/Prefix_sum_array_and_difference_array):
```
Difference array: [1, 2, -3, 3, 1]
Underlying array: [1, 3,  0, 3, 4]
```

If we compute the underlying array and we see a `0` then we can set `head` to the location *after* the `0`, since all the nodes up to that point add up to `0`.

But what if we don't see any `0`? We can try one of the other examples:
```
Difference array: [1, 2, 3, -3, 4]
Underlying array: [1, 3, 6,  3, 7]
```

Here we notice that we can remove the sublist `[3, -3]` but there are no `0` in the underlying array. However, there are `3` in both locations *just before* the "cuts". This makes sense: If we ever see a value we've seen before, then we've gone over a sublist which sums to `0`.

## A solution
Let's now describe a simple solution. We iterate over the list and save the underlying array. If we ever see a value we've seen before, we find all nodes which had that sum and we set those nodes' `next` to the iteration node's `next`. So we would take this:
```
        ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐
head───>│ 1 │───>│ 2 │───>│ -3│───>│ 3 │───>│ 1 │───>null
        └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘
```
and get underlying array `[1, 3, 0, 3, 4]` and therefore output this:
```
     ┌───────────────────────────────┐
     │                               v
     │  ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐
head─┘  │ 1 │───>│ 2 │───>│ -3│───>│ 3 │───>│ 1 │───>null
        └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘
```

It's okay that the other links still exist since we can't get to them<sup>†</sup> and they are not part of the returned linked list.

We would also take this:
```
        ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐
head───>│ 1 │───>│ 1 │───>│ 5 │───>│ -6│───>│ 1 │───>│ 1 │───>│ -1│───>null
        └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘    └───┘
```
and get underlying array `[1, 2, 7, 1, 2, 3, 2]` and therefore output this:
```
              ┌───────────────────────────────┐
              │                               v
        ┌───┐ │  ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐    ┌───┐
head───>│ 1 │─┘  │ 1 │─┐  │ 5 │───>│ -6│───>│ 1 │─┐  │ 1 │───>│ -1│───>null
        └───┘    └───┘ │  └───┘    └───┘    └───┘ │  └───┘    └───┘     ^
                       │                          │                     │
                       └──────────────────────────┴─────────────────────┘
```
Note that we need to change the `next` of every node for which we see a sum, since any individual node may end up being removed from the final list. In the above case, what started as the second node was the first time we saw a sum of `2` but it was not in the final list.

Again, when we return `head` we won't be able to access the messy pointers, so the linked list would appear cleanly as `1 -> 1 -> null`.

## Optimizing
In the above description, we said

> If we ever see a value we've seen before, we find all nodes which had that sum

The naive way of doing this would be to store nothing and instead compute the sums each time. This would require, for each node in the list, an *O(n)* traversal of the list, making the total time complexity *O(n<sup>2</sup>)*.

An idea which requires less summing would be to store a list of the values we've seen before and simultaneously iterate over the list of sums and the linked list. Of course, this still requires the *O(n)* traversal per node, so the total time complexity is still *O(n<sup>2</sup>)*.

Often, it's a good idea when working with linked lists to try to make pointers to each node that we might want to access. So here, we could store two lists: One for the values and one for the pointers.

Now we recognize that we have two parallel arrays. This type of pattern always has potential to become a hashmap. Since we are using sums to look up nodes, it's natural for the keys to be the sums and the values to be the node pointers.

The one thing we have to deal with is that a hashmap cannot have duplicate keys. Recall

> we need to change the `next` of every node for which we see a sum

So instead of the values being pointers, instead they should be lists of pointers.

## Optimizing 2
While we did reduce the amount of time required to look up sums, the solution is actually still *O(n<sup>2</sup>)* since for each node, we have to iterate over a list of nodes, and that list could be size *n*. In order to shorten the time, we'll have to try something a little more clever.

First we notice that in the end, all the nodes with the same sum are pointing to the same node: the `next` of the last node with that sum. So perhaps we can store only a pointer to *that* node for each sum.

In this case, we have to first find the last node for each sum, which requires a full iteration over the list. That only contributes an *O(n)* time complexity since we aren't working with *any* lists anymore. In this step we don't even need to set any `next` yet.

After we build the hashmap, we can read it: Starting with the first node, we set its `next` by looking up the sum in the hashmap. The hashmap will give us a pointer to the node *after* the last occurrence of that sum. (Effectively, we just skip the longest sublists which add to `0`.) Then we go to the new `next` and repeat.

Note that we don't need to change every node's pointer, only the pointers which will end up in the final list. This is why we can set `next` before we access it.

## Writing the Code
Let's start by setting up our hashmap:
```ruby
def remove_zero_sum_sublists(head)
    last_locations = Hash.new
```
When we store values in this hashmap, we're gonna map each sum to the node *after* the node we just added. So we start by storing `head` by pretending we just added a node and the result was `0`:
```ruby
last_locations[0] = head
```
Next we iterate over the linked list, building the hashmap. First some setup:
```ruby
current_node = head
current_sum = 0
while !current_node.nil?
```
On each iteration we calculate the sum:
```ruby
current_sum += current_node.val
```
Then we store the location of the node *after* this sum in the hashmap:
```
last_locations[current_sum] = current_node.next
```
And finally we go to the `next` node:
```ruby
current_node = current_node.next
```
We now have the hash so we just need to read it. We actually start with the last node where the sum was `0` since this allows us to remove any sublists which sum to `0` from the beginning:
```ruby
current_node = last_locations[0]
current_sum = 0
while !current_node.nil?
```
Get the current sum:
```ruby
current_sum += current_node.val
```
Set our current `next` to the node *after* the last occurrence of that sum:
```ruby
current_node.next = last_locations[current_sum]
```
And finally we go to the `next` node:
```ruby
current_node = current_node.next
```
What we return will be the last node where the sum was `0` since again, we are trying to skip any sublists from the beginning:
```ruby
return last_locations[0]
```
Note that we changed all the pointers in place.

In total, the result looks like this:
```ruby
def remove_zero_sum_sublists(head)
  last_locations = Hash.new
  last_locations[0] = head

  current_node = head
  current_sum = 0
  while !current_node.nil?
    current_sum += current_node.val
    last_locations[current_sum] = current_node.next
    current_node = current_node.next
  end

  current_node = last_locations[0]
  current_sum = 0
  while !current_node.nil?
    current_sum += current_node.val
    current_node.next = last_locations[current_sum]
    current_node = current_node.next
  end

  return last_locations[0]
end
```

## Algorithm analysis
The final result involves iterating over the linked list twice. Each iteration involves a constant number of *O(1)* operations, so in total our time complexity is *O(n)*.

In the worst case, we have to store a pointer to each node in the list. This means our space complexity will be *O(n)*.

It is not possible to improve the time complexity since there is no way to remove the zero-sum sublists without iterating over the whole linked list. Iteration takes *O(n)*.

It *is* possible to improve the space complexity to *O(1)*. Recall that the very first naive approach didn't store a list of sums, it just computed sums on demand. So it used *O(1)* space. In order to produce our final answer, we increased our space complexity in order to decrease our time complexity.

It seems unlikely that a solution with *O(1)* space complexity and *O(n)* time complexity exists.

## Notes
<sup>†</sup> A language with automatic garbage collection will find that there is no pointer to the first node in each "dead" sublist. In a language without garbage collection, you should be freeing every one of these "dead" nodes. This actually leads to a slower algorithm (with the same time complexity). The best time to do this would probably be in the first iteration:
```cpp
while (current_node) {
    current_sum += current_node->val;
    if (last_locations.find(current_sum) != last_locations.end()) {
        ListNode *n = last_locations[current_sum];
        while (n != current_node->next) {
            ListNode *next_n = n->next;
            delete n;
            n = next_n;
        }
    }
    last_locations[current_sum] = current_node->next;
    current_node = current_node->next;
}
```
So please, use smart pointers.

~~Sorry if this code isn't perfect, I'm not a C++ programmer.~~
