---
layout: leetcode
num: 331
title: "331. (Medium) Verify Preorder Serialization of a Binary Tree"
date: 2021-01-02
---

<https://leetcode.com/problems/verify-preorder-serialization-of-a-binary-tree/>

# Statement
---

One way to serialize a binary tree is to use pre-order traversal. When we encounter a non-null node, we record the node's value. If it is a null node, we record using a sentinel value such as `#`.

```
     _9_
    /   \
   3     2
  / \   / \
 4   1  #  6
/ \ / \   / \
# # # #   # #
```

For example, the above binary tree can be serialized to the string `"9,3,4,#,#,1,#,#,2,#,6,#,#"`, where `#` represents a null node.

Given a string of comma separated values, verify whether it is a correct preorder traversal serialization of a binary tree. Find an algorithm without reconstructing the tree.

Each comma separated value in the string must be either an integer or a character `'#'` representing `null` pointer.

You may assume that the input format is always valid, for example it could never contain two consecutive commas such as `"1,,3"`.

### Example 1:
```
Input: "9,3,4,#,#,1,#,#,2,#,6,#,#"
Output: true
```

### Example 2:
```
Input: "1,#"
Output: false
```

### Example 3:
```
Input: "9,#,#,1"
Output: false
```
---
# Approach

## First ideas

Note that we are explicitly instructed to
> Find an algorithm without reconstructing the tree.

This tells us that we can solve the problem with some technique simpler than reconstructing the tree. From another angle, it tells us that the structure of the tree is not important. Instead, we should be looking for some property of the string which lets us distinguish between a valid tree and an invalid one.

## Counting

One of the most common approaches on problems involving strings or arrays is to count things. What can we count?

Looking at the given examples, and coming up with some other examples, we discover that if the input represents a valid tree, the number of `#` is always one more than the number of integers.

However, this alone is not enough. Consider the input, `"9,#,#,1,#"`. If we start reconstructing the tree, we will get to this point:
```
 9
/ \
# #
```
and then we are unable to add the next `1` to the tree. So we need to keep looking.

## Counting 2

From reconstructing the above tree, we may have noticed something: When the running tally of `#` exceeds the running tally of integers, the tree is filled.

Think about it this way: Start with a single pointer (or reference), `head`. Before reading the first value in the string, `head` could either point to a node or to `null`, but we don't know which. We will call a pointer in this state "free".

When we read a value from the string,
- If it is `#`, a free pointer is "fixed" to point to `null`
- If it is an integer, a free pointer is "fixed" to point to a node

Therefore, we know that if we read a value and there are no free pointers available, the string cannot represent a valid tree. So we should count the free pointers. What happens to the running count of free pointers?

- At the start, there is a single free pointer, `head`
- If we read a `#`, we "lose" a free pointer
- If we read an integer, we "lose" a free pointer but we "gain" two more

Now, if we get to the end of the string and there are still free pointers available, the string does *not* represent a valid tree. Note that a pointer being free is different from it pointing to `null`. If a pointer is free, that's like saying it's undefined, whereas a pointer to `null` is defined.

## Writing the code

The first thing to do is split the input into an array. We don't need to do any parsing.
```ruby
def is_valid_serialization(preorder)
    array_preorder = preorder.split(",");
```

Remember that we start with one free pointer, `head`.
```ruby
free_ptrs = 1
```

Then we iterate over the array,
```ruby
array_preorder.each do |elem|
```

check to see if there are free pointers available,
```ruby
if free_ptrs == 0
    return false
end
```

and if so, we figure out how many free pointers are available after adding this node.
```ruby
if elem == "#"
    free_ptrs -= 1
else
    free_ptrs += 1
end
```

Finally, if we determine it's possible to insert all the nodes into the tree, we have to check that there are no remaining free pointers.
```ruby
return free_ptrs == 0
```

In total, the result looks like this:
```ruby
def is_valid_serialization(preorder)
    array_preorder = preorder.split(",");
    free_ptrs = 1

    array_preorder.each do |elem|
        if free_ptrs == 0
            return false
        end

        if elem == "#"
            free_ptrs -= 1
        else
            free_ptrs += 1
        end
    end

    return free_ptrs == 0
end
```

## Algorithm analysis

The time complexity is *O(n)* because we iterate over the input once and perform a constant-time operation on each element. This cannot be improved, as parsing the entire input requires a minimum of *O(n)* operations, and we must parse the whole input.

The space complexity is *O(n)* because we generate a new array of length at most a constant multiple of the input length. This cannot be improved, as the input is a string in memory of length *n*.

However, we can still reduce the total amount of space used. For very long inputs, we can save some space by iterating over the string directly instead of splitting and creating an array. The tradeoff is that we would have to parse the string directly, which would create some clutter.
