---
layout: leetcode
num: 798
title: "798. (Hard) Smallest Rotation with Highest Score"
date: 2021-01-01
---

<https://leetcode.com/problems/smallest-rotation-with-highest-score/>

# Statement
---

Given an array `A`, we may rotate it by a non-negative integer `K` so that the array becomes `A[K], A[K+1], A{K+2], ... A[A.length - 1], A[0], A[1], ..., A[K-1]`.  Afterward, any entries that are less than or equal to their index are worth 1 point. 

For example, if we have `[2, 4, 1, 3, 0]`, and we rotate by `K = 2`, it becomes `[1, 3, 0, 2, 4]`.  This is worth 3 points because 1 > 0 [no points], 3 > 1 [no points], 0 <= 2 [one point], 2 <= 3 [one point], 4 <= 4 [one point].

Over all possible rotations, return the rotation index K that corresponds to the highest score we could receive.  If there are multiple answers, return the smallest such index K.

### Example 1:
```
Input: [2, 3, 1, 4, 0]
Output: 3
Explanation:  
Scores for each K are listed below: 
K = 0,  A = [2,3,1,4,0],    score 2
K = 1,  A = [3,1,4,0,2],    score 3
K = 2,  A = [1,4,0,2,3],    score 3
K = 3,  A = [4,0,2,3,1],    score 4
K = 4,  A = [0,2,3,1,4],    score 3
```

So we should choose K = 3, which has the highest score.

### Example 2:
```
Input: [1, 3, 0, 2, 4]
Output: 0
Explanation:  A will always have 3 points no matter how it shifts.
So we will choose the smallest K, which is 0.
```

**Note**:
- `A` will have length at most `20000`.
- `A[i]` will be in the range `[0, A.length]`.

---

# Approach

## First ideas

We can instantly cut down the number of possible values of `K` since rotating an array of length `n` a total of `n` times results in us getting the same array back. Therefore, we need only worry about `K` from `0` to `A.length - 1`.

The naive approach, which is to simply calculate the score for each `K`, is going to be *O(n<sup>2</sup>)*. There are a few indicators that this will not be the final solution:

- The input length is up to 20000, meaning *n<sup>2</sup>* could be in the millions
- The problem is marked as Hard, but the problem statement is fairly simple
- The problem seems like a lot of arithmetic is involved, which often indicates there's a clever way to do less

However, this doesn't mean we should abandon the naive approach, as we may still learn something from studying it.

## Naive approach

For each `K`, we will calculate the score. This is done by iterating over the `K` and for each, iterating over the shifted input, and for each of the `shifted_A[i]`, checking if `shifted_A[i] <= i`. We sum these to get the score for a particular `K`. Then we look for the `K` that gave the maximum score.

While this approach requires no extra storage space, it's got very high time complexity. So let's look at our options.

## Reverse the iterators

Whenever the naive approach involves nested iterations, we should always ask what happens if we reverse the iterations. In this case, that means iterating over the input first, and for each `A[i]` iterating over the `K`.

Now instead of getting a total score for each `K`, we get, for each `A[i]`, what score it gives to each `K`. Consider the input `[2, 3, 1, 4, 0]`:

| i |A[i]|K=0|K=1|K=2|K=3|K=4|
|:-:|:--:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 0 |  2 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| 1 |  3 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| 2 |  1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 |
| 3 |  4 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| 4 |  0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |

(In order to find the total score for each `K`, we sum the column.)

But something interesting appears: Look at each row separately. The row is composed of a bunch of `0` and `1` but they are not positioned randomly. In fact, the row is composed of a block of consecutive `0` and a block of consecutive `1`, rotated.

## Storing deltas

So now let's try an alternate storage method for the rows: Any array of integers can be represented as a *difference array* `deltas`, which stores the differences between the elements of the original. For example,
```
original: [3, 4, 6, 0, 7, 5, 2, 1]
deltas:   [3,+1,+2,-6,+7,-2,-3,-1]
```

In order to recover the value at a certain index, we start from the beginning and sum the array up to (and including) that index:
```
original[3] = sum(deltas[0 to 3]) = 3 + 1 + 2 - 6 = 0
```

Therefore, we can store the table above as

| i |A[i]|K=0|K=1|K=2|K=3|K=4|
|:-:|:--:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 0 |  2 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 |-1 |
| 1 |  3 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 |-1 |
| 2 |  1 | 1 | 0 |-1 | 1 | 0 |
| 3 |  4 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| 4 |  0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |

It may seem like we haven't done much to save time or space, and it is true that storing deltas doesn't generally save anything. But recall,

> In fact, the row is composed of a block of consecutive `0` and a block of consecutive `1`, rotated.

This means that each row in the first table contains a maximum of two changes of value: one from `0` to `1` and one from `1` to `0`. So each row in the second table contains a maximum of three nonzero values: one for each change of value and one for the initial value.

## Interpreting deltas

Look back at the second table. If we want to calculate the scores for each `K`, we just need to sum the deltas for each `A[i]`:
```
sum_deltas: [2,+1,+0,+1,-2]
scores:     [2, 3, 3, 4, 2]
```

## Storing deltas 2

Now we realize that we don't actually need a row for each `A[i]`, as in the end we'll just be summing up each column. Instead, we'll use the table to generate a single array `sum_deltas`.

After this modification, the solution becomes *O(n)* since we only need to iterate over `A` and find three values for each.

## Generating the deltas

We have now turned the problem of checking if `shifted_A[i] <= i` for each `K` and `i` into a new problem: for each `A[i]`, we generate a delta array by

1. Solving for the initial value
2. Finding where the `1` goes
3. Finding where the `-1` goes

Solving for the initial value is easy: It's just the score contributed after 0 shifts, which is `A[i] <= i`.

Finding where the `1` goes isn't too hard: Every element contributes to the score if it is at the end of the array, since its index there is maximal. So we need only count the number of rotations until each element lands at the back of the array. This is just `i + 1` for elements not already at the back and `0` for the element at the back. In other words, it's `(i + 1) % A.length`.

Finding where the `-1` goes is a bit tricky. We are looking for the `index` such that 
```
A[i] = index + 1
```
as this is the first `index` (after the `1`) where `A[i]` does not contribute a point. Since `index = i - K`, we solve
```
A[i] = i - K + 1
```
for `K` and find
```
K = i + 1 - A[i]
```
It is possible that we have solved for a `K < 0` which would be bad, so we add `A.length` and mod by `A.length` to fix the issue. (Recall from the start that shifting an array by its length doesn't do anything, so we are acting like we're shifting (backwards) by `K` then shifting (forwards) by `A.length`.)

Brownie points if you realized that this doesn't apply in the case `A[i] = 0`. If we use this approach there, we will add `+1` to `deltas[(i + 1) % A.length]` but we will also add `-1` to `deltas[(i + 1 - A[i] + A.length) % A.length]`. These are the same index, so the `+1` and `-1` will cancel out to give the desired result!

## Writing the code

First let's initialize `sum_deltas` as an array of length `a.length` and entries all `0`:
```ruby
def best_rotation(a)
    sum_deltas = Array.new(a.length) { 0 }
```

Then we generate the deltas and use them to populate `sum_deltas`:
```ruby
(0...a.length).each do |i|
```
1. ```ruby
if a[i] <= i
    sum_deltas[0] += 1
end
```
2. ```ruby
sum_deltas[(i+1) % a.length] += 1
```
3. ```ruby
sum_deltas[(i + 1 - a[i] + a.length) % a.length] -= 1
```

And finally we just need to find the `K` which gives the largest score:
```ruby
current_score = 0
max_score = -999999  # Can be any negative number
best_k = -1          # Can be any number
(0...sum_deltas.length).each do |k|
    current_score += sum_deltas[k]
    if current_score > max_score
        max_score = current_score
        best_k = k
    end
end
```

The final result looks like this:
```ruby
def best_rotation(a)
    sum_deltas = Array.new(a.length) { 0 }

    (0...a.length).each do |i|
        if a[i] <= i
            sum_deltas[0] += 1
        end
        sum_deltas[(i+1) % a.length] += 1
        sum_deltas[(i + 1 - a[i] + a.length) % a.length] -= 1
    end

    current_score = 0
    max_score = -999999  # Can be any negative number
    best_k = -1          # Can be any number
    (0...sum_deltas.length).each do |k|
        current_score += sum_deltas[k]
        if current_score > max_score
            max_score = current_score
            best_k = k
        end
    end

    return best_k
end
```

## Algorithm analysis

Since we are iterating over the input, but each time we iterate we are doing constant-time tasks, the total time complexity is *O(n)*.

The input has *O(n)* space complexity and we generate an array which is also length *n* so our total space complexity is *O(n)*.

There are still a few clever improvements we could make to save some time when generating the deltas:
- Notice that step 2 will give `+1` to every entry of `sum_deltas`. In some languages, we can initialize `sum_deltas` to be an array of all `1`, and therefore save some time. In Ruby, this would be
```ruby
sum_deltas = Array.new(a.length) { 1 }
```
- Notice that we don't actually need to do step 1 at all! If we skip step 1, we are basically subtracting `score[0]` from every `score[K]`. So we will no longer know what the total scores are, but we will still be able to distinguish which `K` gives the largest score.
  - Note that in the original question, scores are always positive, but if we skip step 1 we could be comparing negative numbers, so we will have to initialize `max_score` to a large negative number.

## Closing notes

The code is still very readable. Even though we put a lot of work into making the code efficient enough to pass the test cases, that doesn't mean we sacrificed any readability. At least, it's readable to us.

If you had to maintain code like this, but somebody else had written it, would you understand it? Perhaps. But it might take you a while to realize how `sum_deltas` works.

As such, before committing this, you should add a short summary of how this works. At least comment that `sum_deltas` is a difference array and what the process for generating deltas is.
